---
title: African Americans' Leisure Lifestyle in Maine
layout: page-narrow
permalink: /leisure.html
---

## We Exist: African Americans' Leisure Lifestyle in Maine

*We Exist: African Americans' Leisure Lifestyle in Maine* is the fourth of the six-part digital exhibit series. The current exhibit explores the nuances of African American leisure participation, especially as it relates to Maine. In the exhibit, the focus on leisure activities among African Americans highlights some divergences from general perceptions that the public has of African Americans. The exhibit also helps to shed light on the processes behind the decisions that African Americans living across the United States and in Maine made when they decided to participate in leisure activities in the early 1900s and onward. The exhibit is comprised of photos, written transcripts, and audio interview clips from the Gerald E. Talbot and African American Collections. Although the focus in on leisure, the exhibit incorporates the Black family as a pillar of resistance and resilience as they wrestle internally within themselves, and with the public at large, about how to navigate engaging in areas and in activities that should seemingly be a right of all Americans.

African Americans are generally satisfied with their lives and find leisure to be an important part of a successful life.[^1] Still there is seemingly a lack of literature that explore the relevance of race in African American leisure activities.[^2]<sup>, </sup>[^3] Only recently recognized of their citizenship, African Americans sought to fashion their own recreational and commemorative destination befitting a "rising race." Wealthy African American families would purchase cottages and flock to leisure sites of historical significance and relax in the company of family and friends. In this sense, leisure was influential in its impact on class consciousness among African Americans during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Ultimately, the intersection of race, leisure, and memory, was essential to the progress and division of black political culture from Reconstruction through Jim Crow.[^4]

However, African Americans also note incidents of racial discrimination which influenced the quality of their leisure experiences.[^5] And while African Americans are relatively free to go where they want to for leisure, they prefer more structure and less adventure than their white counterparts, a behavior associated with the legacy of racial oppression in the United States.[^6] Very often African Americans will travel in groups and travel to "safe areas."[^7]<sup>, </sup>[^8] More often than not they participate in leisure activities such as bus tours or group tours (a lot of these bus tours and group activities are connected to the church). Across the United States, separate public spaces were the law of the land and so Black-owned hotels flourished.[^9] Examples of such establishments are observed in the Cummings Guest House registry. There is some indication that African Americans raised after the 60s began to travel as individuals or as couples.[^10]

African Americans began to "test the boundaries of racial etiquette that regulated public spaces."[^11]<sup>, </sup>[^12] The varying ways in which African Americans began to utilize leisure spaces challenged white historical narratives about African American leisure activities which at times led to contentions between African Americans and whites.[^13]<sup>, </sup>[^14] While segregated pools, parks, and playgrounds of the 1950's and 1960's in the United States have been replaced by leisure areas without official racial restrictions, most African Americans continue to understand when they are welcome and when they are not welcome in most leisure areas. This feeling of being less welcome in leisure activities has a considerable impact on many African American leisure choices.[^15]<sup>, </sup>[^16]

Notwithstanding, African Americans' own class and gender orientations, and economic interests, shape their leisure focuses as well.[^17]<sup>, </sup>[^18] By and large, it was middle-class African Americans who could venture outside of their neighborhoods to participate in leisure activities that were perceived to be only engaged in by the white community. To the extent that we observe middle-class African Americans out in areas along with European Americans is an indication that African Americans' professional lifestyles, their behavior and attitudes, are more in common with their middle-class white counterparts than we are led to believe.[^19] The clientele that patronized the Cummings Guest House included, but was not limited to, Black doctors, Black politicians, and Black musical entertainers, with the most famous musician being Duke Ellington.

However, Black women in higher socioeconomic groups experience leisure that is diverse. Their leisure participation involves participation in out-of-home activities, and takes place with a wider range of institutions.[^20]<sup>, </sup>[^21] For example, boat excursions and trips to vacation shops in different shops across Maine. On the other hand, Black men of different income and education levels participate in similar leisure preferences.[^22]

Within the family, parents and children exchange information which have important consequences for the attitudes and behavior of both parents and children.[^23] Since most African American middle-class families "remain acutely aware of the social ills of racial discrimination in society" (p. 5), the value that African American children place on a particular leisure activity depends in large part on the value that their parents place upon a particular leisure activity.[^24] This is evident in Black families who vacation in Maine in family group activities or as Black fraternal orders in spaces where they were welcomed. Unlike their white fraternal orders, Black fraternal orders offered more opportunities for African Americans of diverse classes and gender to join.[^25]

The exhibit consists of four focal galleries. The first gallery consists of photos which capture African Americans participating in various leisure activities in Maine. The second and third galleries consist of interview quotes and selected audio recording clips from the oral history project 'Home Is Where I Make It': African American Community and Activism in Greater Portland, Maine". The fourth gallery consists of selected pages from the Cummings Guest House register.

The visual and audio presentations will help those with certain disabilities who are interested in the exhibit to actively participate. The use of multiple sources (photos; written word; audio) helps to support evidence regarding African Americans and their shared leisure interests. The quotes, audio clips, and selected Cummings Guest House register pages are representations of how some of Maine's Black residents, and African Americans outside of Maine who come to Maine to participate in leisure activities, talk about the type of leisure activities they participate in, and give insight into the process of selecting particular leisure activities.

### References

[^1]. Philipp, S.F. (1998). African-American Perceptions of Leisure, Racial Discrimination, and Life Satisfaction. Perceptual and Motor Skills. 87(3 Pt 2):1418. DOI: 10.2466/pms.1998.87.3f.1418. PMID: 10052101.
[^2]. Philipp, S. (2000). Race and the Pursuit of Happiness. Journal of Leisure Research, 32(1), 121-124.
[^3]. Shinew, K. J., Floyd, M. F., & Parry, D. (2004). Understanding the Relationship between Race and Leisure Activities and Constraints: Exploring an Alternative Framework, Leisure Sciences, 26(2), 181-199, DOI: 10.1080/01490400490432109.
[^4]. Kahrl, Andrew W. (2008). The Political Work of Leisure: Class, Recreation, and African American Commemoration at Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, 1881-1931. Journal of Social History, (42)1: 57-77.
[^5]. Philipp, S.F. (1998). African-American Perceptions of Leisure, Racial Discrimination, and Life Satisfaction. Perceptual and Motor Skills. 87(3 Pt 2):1418. DOI: 10.2466/pms.1998.87.3f.1418. PMID: 10052101
[^6]. Philipp, S. (1994). Race and Tourism Choice: A Legacy of Discrimination. Annals of Tourism Research, 21:479–488.
[^7]. Butler, D.L., Carter, P.L. & Brunn, S.D. (2002). African-American Travel Agents: Travails and Survival. Annals of Tourism Research, (29):1022–1035.
[^8]. Davidoff, P., D. Davidoff, and J. Eyre. (1995). Tourism Geography. Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice-Hall.
[^9]. The authors argue that Blacks and other minorities will usually will visit first areas of common heritage before venturing into the unknown.
[^10]. Walker, J. (1998). The History of Black Business in America: Capitalism, Race, and Entrepreneurship. New York: Macmillan Library Reference. Pp 254.
[^11]. Butler, D.L., Carter, P.L. & Brunn, S.D. (2002). African-American Travel Agents: Travails and Survival. Annals of Tourism Research, (29):1022–1035.
[^12]. Brundage, W. F. (2005). The Southern Past: A Clash of Race and Memory. Cambridge, Massachusetts.
[^13]. Clark, K. A. (2005). Defining Moments: African American Commemoration and Political Culture in the South, 1863-1913. Chapel Hill.
[^14]. Kahrl, Andrew W. (2008). The Political Work of Leisure: Class, Recreation, and African American Commemoration at Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, 1881-1931. Journal of Social History, (42)1: 57-77.
[^15]. Foster, M. S. (1999). In the face of" Jim Crow": Prosperous Blacks and Vacations, Travel and Outdoor Leisure, 1890-1945. The Journal of Negro History, 84(2), 130-149.
[^16]. West, P. (1989). Urban region parks and black minorities: Subculture, marginality, and interracial relations in park use in the Detroit metropolitan area. Leisure Sciences, 11, 11-28.
[^17]. Philipp, S. F. (1999). Are we welcome? African American racial acceptance in leisure activities and the importance given to children's leisure. Journal of Leisure Research, 31(4), 385-403. DOI:https://doi-org.wv-o-ursus-proxy01.ursus.maine.edu/10.1080/00222216.1999.11949873.
[^18]. Woodard, M. D. (1988). Class, Regionality, and Leisure among Urban Black Americans: The Post-Civil Rights Era. Journal of Leisure Research, 20(2), 87-105.
[^19]. Wolch, J., & Zhang, J. (2004). Beach Recreation, Cultural Diversity and Attitudes toward Nature. Journal of Leisure Research, 36(3), 414-443.
[^20]. Barr, K., Farrell, M., Barnes, G., & Welte, J. (1993). Race, Class, and Gender Differences in Substance Abuse: Evidence of Middle-Class/Underclass Polarization among Black Males. Social Problems, 40, 314-327.
[^21]. Green, E., Hebron, S., & Woodard, D. (1987). Leisure and Gender. London: The Sports Council and Economic & Social Research Council.
[^22]. Shinew, K. J., Floyd, M. F., McGuire, F. A., & Noe, F. P. (1996). Class Polarization and Leisure Activity Preferences of African Americans: Intragroup Comparisons. Journal of Leisure and Research, 28(4): 219-232.
[^23]. Shinew, K. J., Floyd, M. F., McGuire, F. A., & Noe, F. P. (1996). Class Polarization and Leisure Activity Preferences of African Americans: Intragroup Comparisons. Journal of Leisure and Research, 28(4): 219-232.
[^24]. Sigel, L. E. (1985). A Conceptual Analysis of Beliefs. In L E. Sigel (Ed.), Parental Belief System: The Psychological Consequences for Children (pp. 345-371). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
[^25]. Goner-Edwards, A. E, & Edwards, H. E. (1988). The Black Middle-Class: Definition and Demographics. In A. F. Coner-Edwards & J. Spurlock (Eds.), Black Families in Crisis: The Middle-Class (pp. 1-10). New York. Brunner and Mazel.
[^26]. Mjagkij, Nina, ed. (2001) Organizing Black America: An Encyclopedia of African American Associations. New York: Garland.