---
title: The Black Church, Maine’s Black Residents, and the Wider Community
layout: page-narrow
permalink: /community.html
---

## We Exist: The Black Church, Maine’s Black Residents, and the Wider Community

*We Exist: The Black Church, Maine’s Black residents and the wider Community* is the third of the six-part digital exhibit series. The current exhibit explores the various relationships between Black parishioners and the Black church, and the community at large. The explorations of the relationships between Maine’s Black residents and the Black church encapsulate in miniature the characteristic qualities of the relationships that Maine’s Black residents have with the Maine community.[^1] The exhibit is comprised of photos, written transcripts, and audio interview clips from the Gerald E. Talbot and African American Collections. The exhibit centers on Black families and individuals in the state of Maine and seek to tell their stories of how the Black church has helped them in their personal, civic, financial, and political lives.

Religious organizations have been identified by many researchers to be the greatest institutions through which African Americans, individually and collectively, are spiritually, psychologically, emotionally, and physically enhanced.[^2]<sup>, </sup>[^3]<sup>, </sup>[^4] The Black church is more than a religious institution; it is also a social movement and a social organization[^5] and is very responsive towards the needs of its community members.

The Black church and the Black family are two of three of the most critical institutions whose interactions have been responsible for the viability of the African American community. [^6]<sup>, </sup>[^7] And much like the Black family, the Black church underscores the most basic values of the African American cultural heritage. These values include spirituality, high achievement aspirations, and commitment to family as "enduring, flexible and adaptive functional mechanisms for survival."[^8] The Black church as a uniquely Black-directed institution has historically been called on to serve the religious/spiritual,[^9] educational, political, and even the economic needs of its parishioners. The Black church was frequently the only place that African Americans could gather without being supervised or relegated to a subordinate position.[^10]

Studies suggest that the Black church plays a critical role in the lives of parishioners and the wider community as civil society.[^11]<sup>, </sup>[^12]<sup>, </sup>[^13] In addition to serving its principal role as a religious institution, the Black church helps parishioners and the community, maintain their spiritual lives.[^14] History records that the Abyssinian served as the meeting site of various social groups, including a sewing circle, temperance society, and antislavery society. The Black church also served the educational needs of the Black community by serving as a school for local Black children. The Abyssinian played an important part of the larger Colored Convention Movement (1830-1861), a movement that saw Blacks gather in major American centers to discuss issues of concern to them, one of the most pronounced of these topics having been the abolition of slavery (pg. 10). Green Memorial in Portland flexed its entrepreneurial muscles by participating in the sale of cooked meals to fund the church’s mortgage and campaign fund raising. At times, sale proceeds supplemented the church’s budget.[^15]

Over the years, an undeniable and convincing body of evidence has emphasized the importance of African-American churches as conduits for political skills, resources, and mobilization.[^16] There is indication of the continuing importance and durability of the African-American church as a viable and politically relevant institution.[^17] Historically, African Americans who consistently attend church belong to a larger number of politically relevant organizations.[^18]<sup>, </sup>[^19] Of note, simply attending church does not provide enough social capital resources to push African Americans into political engagements. Rather, it is observed that Black churches that espouse a civic culture where members are exposed to political discussions and are encouraged into activism,[^20] at times by church leaders,[^21] and push African American parishioners into political engagement. Involvement in church committee life is important to Black civic skill development (e.g., communication, writing, and organizing skills), which increases these church activists' competence and confidence to participate in political activities.[^22]<sup>, </sup>[^23] We hope that these photos, written word, and audio add to our quest to adequately examine the relationships that exist with Black residents in Maine and the Black church.

The exhibit consists of three focal galleries. The first gallery consists of photos which capture Black inhabitants in Maine participating in church activities both inside and outside of the church. The second and third galleries consist of interview quotes and selected audio recording clips from the oral history project "’Home Is Where I Make It’: African American Community and Activism in Greater Portland, Maine". The visual and audio presentations will help those with certain disabilities who are interested in the exhibit to actively participate. Next, the use of multiple sources (photos; written word; audio) helps to support observable results regarding Black residents in Maine and their participation in various church activities. The quotes and audio clips are representations of how Maine’s Black residents talk about the creation of church denomination across Maine, how these residents view the church as an integral aspect of their economic, political, cultural, and spiritual lives, and the impact of the church has on the wider community as civil society.

### References

[^1]: Elgersman Lee, M. (2000). A Place in Time:The Black Church: From Anchor to Beacon. The Griot: Preserving African American History in Maine. Winter/Spring 3(2): 1-2.
[^2]: Chaney, C. (2002). Not Forsaking the Assembling of Ourselves Together—Religion and Spirituality in an African American Church Community. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign.
[^3]: Marks, L. D., & Chaney, C. (2006). Faith Communities and African American Families: A Qualitative Look at why the Black Church Matters. In S. D. Ambrose (Ed.), Religion and Psychology: New Research (pp. 277-294). Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science.
[^4]: Taylor, J. T., Ellison, C. G., Chatters, L. M., Levin, J. S., & Lincoln, K. D. (2000). Mental Health Services in Faith Communities: The Role of Clergy in Black Churches. Social Work, 45(1), 73-86.
[^5]: Franklin, R. M. (1997). Another Day's Journey: Black Churches Confronting the American Crisis. Fortress Press.
[^6]: Roberts, J. D. (1980). Roots of a Black Future: Family and Church. Philadelphia: The Westminster Press.
[^7]: Moore, T. (1991). The African-American Church: A Source of Empowerment, Mutual Help, and Social Change. Prevention in Human Services. 10:1, 147-167, DOI: 10.1300/J293v10n01_09
[^8]: Billingsley, A. (1993). Climbing Jacob's Ladder: The Future of African American Families. New York: Simon & Schuster/Touchstone Books.
[^9]: Chaney, C. (2008). Religiosity and Spirituality among Members of an African American Church Community: A Qualitative Analysis. Journal of Religion & Spirituality in Social Work: Social Thought, 27(3), 201-234.
[^10]: Elgersman Lee, M. (2000). A Place in Time:The Black Church: From Anchor to Beacon. The Griot: Preserving African American History in Maine. Winter/Spring 3(2): 1-2.
[^11]: University of Southern Maine, Boch, S., Wood, J. S., Lee, M. E., Solomon, H. M., and Peck, A. J. (2006). “Liberating Visions: Religion and the Challenge of Change in Maine, 1820 to the Present.” Publications (Annual Event Catalog). 3. (pg. 9). https://digitalcommons.usm.maine.edu/event_catalog/3
[^12]: Holman Bell, H. H. (1969). Anchor of the Soul: A Survey of the Negro Convention Movement 1830-1861. New York:Arno Press and the New York Times, 42, 105.
[^13]: Bryant-Davis, T., Ellis, M. U., Edwards, N., Adams, T. P., Counts, P., Arline-Bradley, S., & Sadler, K. (2016). The Role of the Black Church in HIV Prevention: Exploring Barriers and Best Practices. Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology, 26(5), 388-408.
[^14]: University of Southern Maine, Boch, S., Wood, J. S., Lee, M. E., Solomon, H. M., and Peck, A. J. (2006). “Liberating Visions: Religion and the Challenge of Change in Maine, 1820 to the Present.” Publications (Annual Event Catalog). 3. (pg. 9). https://digitalcommons.usm.maine.edu/event_catalog/3
[^15]: University of Southern Maine, Boch, S., Wood, J. S., Lee, M. E., Solomon, H. M., and Peck, A. J. (2006). “Liberating Visions: Religion and the Challenge of Change in Maine, 1820 to the Present.” Publications (Annual Event Catalog). 3. (pg. 11 and 12). https://digitalcommons.usm.maine.edu/event_catalog/3
[^16]: Tate, K. (1993). From Protest to Politics: The New Black Voters in American Politics. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
[^17]: Tate, K. (1993). From Protest to Politics: The New Black Voters in American Politics. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
[^18]: Alex-Assensoh, Y., & Assensoh, A. B. (2001). Inner‐City Contexts, Church Attendance, and African‐American Political Participation. Journal of Politics, 63(3), 886-901.
[^19]: Calhoun-Brown, A. (1996). African American Churches and Political Mobilization: The Psychological Impact of Organizational Resources. Journal of Politics. 58 (4): 935-53.
[^20]: Harris, F. (1994). Something Within: Religion as a Mobilizer of African American Political Activism. Journal of Politics. 56 (1): 42-68.
[^21]: Brown, R. K., & Brown, R. E. (2003). Faith and Works: Church-Based Social Capital Resources and African American Political Activism. Social Forces, 82(2), 617-641.
[^22]: Langley, W. M. (2000). The role of pastoral leadership in the sociopolitically active African American church (Order No. 9961630). Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses A&I; ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. (304608942). Retrieved from https://library.umaine.edu/auth/EZproxy/test/authej.asp?url=https://search.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/role-pastoral-leadership-sociopolitically-active/docview/304608942/se-2?accountid=8120
[^23]: Brown, R. K., & Brown, R. E. (2003). Faith and Works: Church-Based Social Capital Resources and African American Political Activism. Social Forces, 82(2), 617-641.